# TB_project

The purpose of this exploratory data analysis (EDA) is to analyze TB indicators by WHO region and by World Bank income group and see trends in the TB indicators between 2007 and 2014. In this EDA I will also use matplotlib for new visualization.

The data from Kaggle includes four indicators: prevalence of tuberculosis (per 100 000 population), number of prevalent tuberculosis cases, deaths due to tuberculosis among HIV-negative people (per 100 000 population) and number of deaths due to tuberculosis, excluding HIV for the period of 2007-2014 for 193 countries. Two columns specify countries by WHO region and by World Bank income group.

Descriptive statistics
Data groupings by indicator and by year showed trends for each indicator. I added a column to see the percent change for each indicator between 2007 and 2014. All indicators decreased: the indicators of deaths from TB, both the rate and the absolute number decreased more (20%-21%) than the prevalence rate and the number of prevalent TB (16%-18%) which may mean increase in  earlier detection of TB and increase in  treatment opportunities for complicated (or resistant) TB in 2014 in comparison with 2007. 

TB data by WHO region
I grouped all four indicators by WHO regions which include Africa, Americas, Eastern Mediterranean, Europe, South-East Asia and Western Pacific. All regions except Africa and Eastern Mediterranean reported a decrease in all four indicators from 2007 to 2014. In Africa, the absolute number of prevalent TB and the absolute number of deaths increased (2% and 5% respectively) while prevalence rate and the death rates decreased. The Eastern Mediterranean region reported an increase in three out of four indicators of 0.1% to 5%, except the absolute number of TB deaths which decreased by 27%. For both Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean regions, it would be good to see the population changes during this period. 

A bigger decrease in all four indicators is reported by the European region (38% to 43%) and the smallest decrease is reported by the Americas region (7% to 17%). The Western Pacific region also reported considerable decreases in all four indicators from 21% to 39% during this period. 

TB data by the World Bank income group. 
The dataset breaks countries into four groups of high, upper-middle, lower-middle and low income groups. In all four groups all four indicators decreased from 2007 to 2014. The upper-middle income countries reported the  highest decrease in all four indicators (20% to 30%). The high-income countries reported the highest decrease in the death numbers (34%). All four groups of countries showed higher decreases in TB death numbers and rates than in prevalence and numbers of TB which means earlier diagnosis and/or better treatment outcomes for more complicated TB.

TB data in the U.S. 
All four indicators decreased considerably between 2007 and 2014 (17% to 35%). While the majority of regions and income groups reported much bigger decreases in TB death rates and numbers, in the U.S. deaths number and rate decreased by 17% and 26% respectively and prevalent TB numbers and rates decreased by 33% and 35% respectively. 

Data visualization
I used boxplots for TB prevalence in 2014 by WHO region and by Word Bank income group. There are countries-outliers that have higher prevalence than the upper whisker of the respective group in the groups of high income and upper middle income groups. By WHO region, there are 2 to 3 outliers with higher TB prevalence than their respective group in four regions except South East Asia and Africa. 
The violin plots show distribution of TB prevalence data in 2014 by the World Bank income group. The lower-middle income countries have a higher distribution of TB prevalence from lowest up to 1200 per 100,000 population with a median of around 200 per 100,000. The low and upper-middle income group of countries have similar distribution of TB prevalence up to around 800 but the median for upper-middle income group is below 50 and the median for the low income group is above 200. 

The histogram for TB prevalence in 2014 with the majority of countries reporting TB prevalence below 200 per 100,000. The line graphs for TB prevalence and TB death rates trends show that  TB death rates were decreasing more than TB prevalence between 2008 to 2012 and then the decrease slowed down. Overall, TB prevalence decreased 18% and TB death rate decreased 21%.

The line graphs by WHO region for two indicators of TB prevalence and TB death rates demonstrated that both indicators in the European region and in Americas are the lowest but these indicators decrease more in the European region. TB prevalence in the eastern Mediterranean region remained approximately the same and the death rate increased during this time period. The death rate in South-East Asia decreased more significantly than TB prevalence. While both TB prevalence and TB death rate in South-East Asia were higher than in Africa, the death rate in South-East Asia decreased more significantly than in the African region from 2007 to 2014. 

The line charts by countries in Africa show that in countries with TB prevalence of approximately 150 per 100,000 in 2007 and below, TB prevalence did not change during 2007 to 2014. Countries with TB prevalence of approximately 150 to 500 per 100,000 in 2007 reported small  decrease in prevalence and countries with TB prevalence higher than 500 per 100,000 reported significant decrease in prevalence. Similarly in Americas, the countries with TB prevalence of approximately 130 and below in 2007 reported  approximately the same  prevalence during 2007-2014 and countries with TB prevalence of 190 and higher reported a decrease in TB prevalence. In the Eastern Mediterranean region, almost in all countries TB prevalence did not change during the reporting period except one country (Djibouti) which reported a sharp increase  which is why the whole region showed an increase in TB prevalence. In Europe, Azerbaijan reported a significant decrease in TB prevalence from 462 to 102 per 100,000. In South East Asia and Western Pacific, almost all countries reported a decrease, except Timour Leste and North Korea. Several countries showed significant fluctuations of the prevalence. 

Scatter plot is built for four income groups. The bubble size is prevalence of TB in 2014 and the X-axis is log of GDP and the Y-axis is the life expectancy. Life expectancy grows with GDP, there is a strong correlation and the bubble size is also correlated with GDP and life expectancy. 

GIF file is the same as the scatter plot but has TB prevalence for the whole period. It also shows the same correlation and in addition countries move to higher GDP and life expectancy. Please see a separate file for GIF. 
